Multi-node modifications for both Forge and Cloud (#647)
timescale/docs.timescale.com-content: getting-started/cloud-multi-node.md

> >:TIP:Timescale currently offers two options for cloud hosting. If you are a
> Timescale Forge user, please use the documentation for [setting up multi-node
> on Forge][forge-multi-node] instead.

Author: ```suggestion
>:TIP:Timescale currently offers two hosting options. If you are a
Timescale Forge user, please use the documentation for [setting up multi-node
on Forge][forge-multi-node] instead.
```

@alexthinath ??

to add just one data node to a cluster, this will perform worse than a
single-node TimescaleDB instance and is not recommended. 

### Step 1: Create Services for Access and Data node Services [](step1)

First, you need to create new Services within your Cloud account. As mentioned 
earlier, you should create _at least_ three Services to set up a multi-node cluster: 
one access node and two data nodes. 

There is currently no way to visually distinguish between the access node and data 
nodes within the Timescale Cloud console, **so we strongly recommend that you include 
“AN" and "DN" in the names of each service, respectively (eg. "an-mycluster", 
"dn1-mycluster", "dn2-mycluster", etc.)**. Services can only assume one role in a 
cluster (access or data node), and only one Service can act as the access node.

For simplicity you can start with the same hardware configuration for all Services. 
On Timescale Cloud, Service plans can be upgraded later to better tune access 
and data node requirements.

>:TIP:More advanced users might consider using larger disks on data nodes (this is 
where the distributed hypertable data is stored) and more memory and CPU for the 
access node.

> >:WARNING: To setup your first multi-node instance in Timescale Cloud, you will
> need to create new instances which will default to TimescaleDB 2.0, the version
> required to implement a multi-node cluster.

Author: ```suggestion
>:WARNING: To setup your first multi-node instance in Timescale Cloud, you will
need to create new instances for the Access Node and Data Nodes.
```

### Step 2: Modify Access Node settings [](step2)

> The hard work of handling distributed queries in a multi-node cluster is handled
> by TimescaleDB for you. Some queries, however, will work better in a distributed
> environment when parameters allow TimescaleDB to more efficiently push down 
> some types of queries to the data nodes, or not have JIT interfere with a
> distributed planning process.

Author: ```suggestion
The hard work of handling distributed queries in a multi-node cluster is handled
by TimescaleDB for you. Some queries, however, will perform better in a distributed
environment when TimescaleDB is configured to more efficiently push down 
some types of queries to the data nodes.
```

To that end, we highly recommend the following settings be modified for the 

> **Access Node** only under the **Advanced Configuration** section.

Author: ```suggestion
**Access Node** only using the **Advanced Configuration** section in the Timescale Cloud console.
```

>:TIP:Timescale currently offers two options for cloud hosting. If you are a
Timescale Forge user, please use the documentation for [setting up multi-node
on Forge][forge-multi-node] instead.

> # Setting up TimescaleDB 2.0 Multi-node on Timescale Cloud

Reviewer: One noteable difference for Multinode on Cloud is that a user can create a new database and setup a multinode for a specific database. Of course using existing is the most straight forward but if user wants he can create a new database on the AN and run all below commands (while adding data nodes they will automatically get provisioned with new database so no additional work there)

Author: After talking with @alexthinath , we decided to not mention this for now and decide if it's worth the effort later.  Thank you for remembering this and pointing it out.

TimescaleDB 2.0  [introduces a number of new features][changes-in-tsdb2] 
to supercharge time-series data even further. One of the most anticipated new features 
is what we call **multi-node** - the ability to create a cluster of TimescaleDB 
instances to scale both reads and writes. 

In this how-to, we’ll show you how to create a multi-node cluster in your Timescale 

> Cloud account with TimescaleDB 2.0 as a "do-it-yourself" (DIY) multi-node experience.

Reviewer 2: "do-it-yourself" (DIY) multi-node experience
 
Let's check with Prashant or maybe mike about this phrasing. I belive there is some sensitivity around how "GA" or how "supportable" multinode is. So I would want to stick to whatever our policy is there

Author: For now, this was what @mfreed settled on so I think we'll keep and consider when either environment supports something smoother.

## Overview of multi-node setup

Multi-node clusters consist of at least two or more TimescaleDB instances 
(called **Services** in Timescale Cloud). Each cluster has one access node (AN) 
and one or more data nodes (DN). As outlined in our [architecture blog posts][distributed-architechture], 
the access node is intended to be the only TimescaleDB instance that you or your 
applications connect to once the cluster is set up. It becomes the "brains" and 
traffic controller of all distributed hypertable activity. In contrast, data nodes 
are not intended to be accessed directly once joined to a multi-node cluster.

>:TIP:A proper TimescaleDB cluster should have at least two data nodes to begin 
realizing the benefits of distributed hypertables. While it is technically possible
to add just one data node to a cluster, this will perform worse than a
single-node TimescaleDB instance and is not recommended. 

### Step 1: Create Services for Access and Data node Services [](step1)

First, you need to create new Services within your Cloud account. As mentioned 
earlier, you should create _at least_ three Services to set up a multi-node cluster: 
one access node and two data nodes. 

> There is currently no way to distinguish between the access node and data 

Reviewer 2: perhaps "No way to visually distinguish in the UI the differences between..."

> There is currently no way to distinguish between the access node and data 

Author: ```suggestion
There is currently no way to visually distinguish between the access node and data 
```

nodes within the Timescale Cloud console, **so we strongly recommend that you include 
“AN" and "DN" in the names of each service, respectively (eg. "an-mycluster", 
"dn1-mycluster", "dn2-mycluster", etc.)**. Services can only assume one role in a 
cluster (access or data node), and only one Service can act as the access node.

For simplicity you can start with the same hardware configuration for all Services. 
On Timescale Cloud, Service plans can be upgraded later to better tune access 
and data node requirements.

>:TIP:More advanced users might consider using larger disks on data nodes (this is 
where the distributed hypertable data is stored) and more memory and CPU for the 
access node.

> >:WARNING: To setup your first multi-node instance in Timescale Cloud, you will

Reviewer 3: Not sure what this warning is saying?  Is it letting the user know that new Timescale Cloud instances will be `2.0`?  I would assume that's the assumption since this is the 2.0 version of the docs?

Author: Yeah, probably not worth putting here now that I know they have no other option.

need to create new instances which will default to TimescaleDB 2.0, the version
required to implement a multi-node cluster.

### Step 2: Modify Access Node settings [](step2)

The hard work of handling distributed queries in a multi-node cluster is handled
by TimescaleDB for you. Some queries, however, will work better in a distributed
environment when parameters allow TimescaleDB to more efficiently push down 

> some types of queries to the data nodes, or not have JIT interfere with a

Reviewer 3: is "JIT" defined earlier in this doc?  If not, can you expand here?

Author: I think I'll just remove the last part of this sentence.

distributed planning process.

To that end, we highly recommend the following settings be modified for the 
**Access Node** only under the **Advanced Configuration** section.

* `pg.jit` = off

> * `pg.max_prepared_transactions` > 0 (150 is a recommended starting value)

Reviewer: I wonder if we should add here few other configuration options that can improve performances : eg using `rowbyrow` fetcher. One other is also enabling `enable_partitionwise_aggregate` so the work can be parallelized across data nodes. Not sure if I missed any. I guess you have a most recent list of tweaks you used during benchmarking?

Author: (seems I had a review in process - didn't realize - and lost some previous comments)

Cloud just doesn't support the other configuration options at this point. If/as they do, we'll update.

<img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.iobeam.com/images/docs/cloud_images/timescale-cloud-adv-config.png" alt="Timescale Cloud advanced configuration"/>

### Step 3: Add Data Nodes to the cluster [](step3)

Once you've created your new Services, you'll enable communication between the 
access node and all data nodes. The currently supported method for securing 
communication between nodes is through **user mapping authentication**.

> Currently, this is a one-time, manual process that must be completed for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is a one-time, manual process that must be completed for
```

each data node.

#### About user mapping authentication

**User mapping authentication** allows users to continue connecting with the `tsdbadmin` 
PostgreSQL user for all data access and cluster management. It also allows you to continue 
making secure (SSL) connections to your Timescale Cloud Access node. 

With user mapping authentication, you don’t need to manage any new users, however, 

> **you  need to have the passwords for the `tsdbadmin` user from each data node you 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**you need to have the passwords for the `tsdbadmin` user from each data node you 
```

```

Repeat these steps for each additional data node that you want to add to the 
cluster. **Always invoke these commands from the access node!**

### Step 4: Create a distributed hyptertable [](step4)

Finally, we can create a distributed hypertable and add data to verify that everything is
set up and working correctly.

```SQL
-- Create your regular table
CREATE TABLE sensor_data (
  time TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL,
  sensor_id INTEGER,
  temperature DOUBLE PRECISION,
  cpu DOUBLE PRECISION
);

-- Convert the table to a distributed hypertable
SELECT create_distributed_hypertable('sensor_data', 'time', 'sensor_id');

-- Insert some test data to verify you are error free
INSERT INTO sensor_data VALUES  ('2020-12-09',1,32.2,0.45);
```

One major point to recognize about the SQL above is the declaration of a partition 
column (`sensor_id`) for the distributed hypertable. This is intentional, and 
**recommended**, for distributed hypertable setups. Previously, with regular, 
single-node hypertables, there was often little benefit in specifying a partition 
key when creating the hypertable. With distributed hyptertables, however, adding

> a partition key is essential to ensure that data is distributed across data nodes 
> on something more than just time. Otherwise, all data for a specific time range 
> will go to one chunk on one node, rather than being distributed across each data 
> node for the same time range.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a partition key is essential to ensure that data is efficiently distributed across data nodes. 
Otherwise, all data for a specific time range will go to one chunk on one node, rather than 
being distributed across all available data nodes for the same time range.
```

From the **access node**, create a new user and GRANT all privileges. 

```SQL
CREATE ROLE mn_user1 LOGIN PASSWORD 'password';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO mn_user1;
```

While connected to the access node we can use a specially designed function to 
execute SQL commands against data nodes. Notice that the list of nodes is included
and for this example, it is assumed that both data nodes exist and are added to
the access node.

```SQL
CALL distributed_exec(query => 'CREATE ROLE mn_user1 LOGIN PASSWORD $$password$$', node_list => '{dn1,dn2}');
CALL distributed_exec(query => 'GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON ALL TABLES IN SCHEMA public TO mn_user1;', node_list => '{dn1,dn2}');
```

Finally we add a user mapping for our newly added user so that the AN can connect 
to the DN with the new user.

```SQL
CREATE USER MAPPING FOR mn_user1 SERVER dn1 OPTIONS (user 'mn_user1', password 'password');
```

A few final reminders as you begin to explore the opportunities of a multi-node server:

1. Multi-node clusters can still use _regular_, non-distributed features like 
regular hypertables, PostgreSQL tables, and continuous aggregations. The data 

> stored in any of these object will reside only on the access node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
stored in any of these objects will reside only on the access node.
```

2. There is no limitation on the number of distributed hypertables a user can 
create on the access node.
3. Finally, remember that once a Service is marked as an access node or data node,

>  it cannot be used to create another TimescaleDB multi-node cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 it cannot be used as part of another TimescaleDB multi-node cluster.
```
Question:  Is it that a Service not be used in another cluster, or it can only be part of one cluster at a time?

## Maintenance tasks

A multi-node TimescaleDB setup requires regular maintenance; in
particular, the distributed transaction log needs to be cleaned up and
non-completed transactions should be "healed". Please refer to our

> standard [multi-node documentation][maintenance-tasks] for

Reviewer 2: This link is working for me

instructions on how to configure a user-defined action for this task.

## Summary [](summary)

Now that you have a basic TimescaleDB multi-node cluster, consider using one of 
our [large sample datasets][sample-data]
to create more distributed hypertables, or consider using your new cluster 
as a target for Prometheus data via [Promscale][promscale].

> Whatever your time-series data need, TimescaleDB multi-node opens up an entirely 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Whatever your time-series data needs, TimescaleDB multi-node opens up an entirely 
```
